Das/pytutorial 3 (#53)
Arcadia-Science/arcadia-computational-training: docs/arcadia-users-group/20230328-intro-to-python-3/lesson.md

```

      Cell In[8], line 1
        which python
              ^
    SyntaxError: invalid syntax

For commands that aren't compatible with this approach, you can use a different type of Jupyter magic syntax using the exclamation point operand `!`.

```python
!which python
```

    /home/ec2-user/miniconda3/envs/GeneFinder/bin/python

This can be really nice when you plan on programming interactively.  
However, using the exclamation point Jupyter magic doesn't translate well if you were to convert your Jupyter notebook into a Python script.  
The details aren't important for this workshop, but if you were to try to use the exclamation point operator, you'd have to rewrite some of your code, which is never fun!  

Instead of relying Jupyter magic, we generally recommend using the package **`subprocess`**, which passes commands from Python into the shell.

```python
import subprocess

subprocess.run(['which', 'python'])
```

    /home/ec2-user/miniconda3/envs/GeneFinder/bin/python

    CompletedProcess(args=['which', 'python'], returncode=0)

The code above runs the same as `!which python`.  
`subprocess.run` passes each element of a list as an argument to the shell. 

> It's unfortunately not as tidy looking, but it does allow for more robust code that can be converted to Python packages or functions without rewriting!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's unfortunately not as tidy looking, but it does allow for more robust code that can be converted to Python scripts without rewriting!
```

```python
import math

# Take the natural logarithm of a number
print(math.log(2))

# Take the square root of a number
print(math.sqrt(4))

# Get the factorial of a number
print(math.factorial(3))
```

    0.6931471805599453
    2.0
    6

In addition to its many functions, **`math`** also includes hard-coded values such as:

```python
print(math.pi)

print(math.e)
```

    3.141592653589793
    2.718281828459045

Packages can thus be used to distribute specific numbers in addition to helpful functions!

---
## P1. Practice

Let's try using some Python packages to do useful things.

> ### Practice 1
> Using a `for` loop, create a directory called `testfiles/` in the current directory and populate it with empty files numbered `file1.txt` to `file5.txt`
>
> **Hint:** The command-line tool `touch` creates an empty file. Its syntax is `touch filename`.

<details>
<summary> Practice 1 Sample Answer </summary>
    <br>
    <pre><code><b>import</b> subprocess
<b>import</b> os

numbers = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]

destination = 'testfiles/'
os.mkdir(destination)

<b>for</b> number <b>in</b> numbers:
    filename = 'file' + str(number) + '.txt'

>     subprocess.run(['touch', destination + filename])

Author: I think the more robust/rigorous way to do it definitely us to use os.path! I'll add it as another example answer.

We'll be blazing through these examples, so don't worry if you don't understand all of the code in each cell - this is mostly to show you how many different kinds of things you can do with Python packages.

---
### 3.1 Plotting with **`matplotlib`**

Presenting data in a visual format often helps us make decisions or communicate our results.  
A popular Python package for making plots is **`matplotlib`**.

Below, we use the module **`matplotlib.pyplot`** to plot some data using `x` and `y` coordinates.

```python
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

x = [1, 2, 3.5, 4.4, 6]
y = [5, 4, 4.1, 3, 3.8]

plt.plot(x, y)
plt.show()
```

    
![png](lesson_files/lesson_52_0.png)
    

You'll notice that rather than simply using `import matplotlib.pyplot`, we added an `as plt` expression to the end of our import statement.  
Python allows you to import packages using aliases.  
This saves you from having to type out `matplotlib.pyplot.plot()` and shortens the expression to `plt.plot()`.  

> Package documentation examples often gives you a suggestion for how you might abbreviate packages for others to be able to understand.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Package documentation examples often give you a suggestion for how you might abbreviate packages for others to be able to understand.  
```

```python
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

x = [1, 2, 3.5, 4.4, 6]
y = [5, 4, 4.1, 3, 3.8]

# You can establish a figure and set the figure size prior to plotting.
plt.figure(figsize = (3, 2)) 

# You can change the background color of your plot
ax = plt.axes()
ax.set_facecolor("xkcd:midnight") # matplotlib recognizes a variety of color names

plt.plot(x, y, c = 'c', linestyle = '-') # You can change the color (c) to cyan using 'c'. You can also set a dashed ('-') linestyle.

# If you call another plotting function without creating a new figure, you can plot again on the same plot.
plt.scatter(x, y, c = 'w', marker = '*', s = 50) # For a scatter plot, you can choose color (c), marker style, and marker size (s).

# You can set the specific x and y limits of your plot
plt.xlim(0.5, 6.5)
plt.ylim(2.5, 5.5)

# You can have matplotlib show a grid, and choose its color
plt.grid(c = 'b')

# You can label the x and y axes of the plot
plt.xlabel('longitude')
plt.ylabel('latitude')

# You can add a title to the plot
plt.title('Casseiopeia')

plt.show()
```

    
![png](lesson_files/lesson_54_0.png)
    

This example only scratches the barest surface of what you can do with **`plt`**.  

> Future workshops will dive into deeper detail about how **`matplotlib`** works and what you can do with it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If people want to learn more, we can have future workshops that dive into deeper detail about how **`matplotlib`** works and what you can do with it.
```

Reviewer: you can keep it phrased as is, but I don't know enough about matplotlib to teach more about it and I didn't want you to feel locked in to covering it!

---
### 3.3 Working with `DataFrame`s using **`pandas`**

A popular package for dealing with tabular data like `.tsv` and `.csv` files is **`pandas`**.  
You can use **`pandas`** to load files and perform all manner of database manipulations using `DataFrame` data structures.

```python
import pandas as pd

> df = pd.DataFrame(pd.read_csv('cities.csv'))

Reviewer: does this have to be wrapped in `pd.DataFrame()`? I've never seen that before

      <th>State</th>
      <th></th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <th>AL</th>
      <td>[Tuscaloosa, Selma]</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>AZ</th>
      <td>[Tucson]</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>BC</th>
      <td>[Vancouver]</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>CA</th>
      <td>[Weed, Stockton, SantaRosa, SantaBarbara, Sant...</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>CO</th>
      <td>[Trinidad, Sterling, Salida]</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>CT</th>
      <td>[Waterbury]</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>DC</th>
      <td>[Washington]</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>DE</th>
      <td>[Wilmington]</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>FL</th>
      <td>[WestPalmBeach, Tampa, Tallahassee, Sarasota, ...</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>GA</th>
      <td>[Waycross, Valdosta, Swainsboro, Savannah]</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>
</div>

As you might notice, **`pandas`** can do rather complex operations using relatively few commands.  
If you tried to manually build some of these functions, it could be quite challenging!  

Hopefully these examples give you a sense of what you can do using Python if you build your skills and become fluent in the language.

> ```python
> 
> ```

Reviewer: you can leave this if you want but we could also delete it
```suggestion
```
